Kyle
Kyle wait I get wait wait
gave me like a whole bio to read
where is it
for you I'm gonna do it
I'm not gonna do it
um uh
we've known each other a long time Kyle
was part of the fat lab show that was
the first gray area Festival that was
here in 2015.
um I don't think you spoke here but I
was trying to think I pretty so that's a
Omission we're like through fate
are glad to remit right now
um
works with code is in a lot of projects
on surveillance and integrating uh
interrogating technology
and it's sort of impact on our lives and
society and
um this new project amends which he's
going to talk about
we support it because it really thinks
about
how the new technologies that we're
thinking about uh supporting new artist
economies are also impacting have
material implications on our
um
reality so
Kyle
hi
it's me I'm Kyle my hair's a little
longer now
um really happy to have been here at
just the right time to uh substitute in
um cool yeah so my work spans from
really large scale installations
it's a very personal performances and
conceptual work this is light leaks
where I worked with Jonas young to
project onto 50 disco balls and map
every single reflection of light
I've also worked with composer Annie
Lewandowski recently to create
installations draped and recovered
fishing gear and we were using machine
learning to generate lighting design
that reveals the complex patterns and
the songs of humpback whales drawing
attention to hundreds of thousands of
whales that are killed every year by
fishing gear besides my artwork I also
work as a technical and creative
consultant so for example I helped
Google build AI powered instruments and
music videos and visualizations
um but for over a year I've been
researching the ecological impact of the
ethereum network and ethereum is one
network that allows artists to sell
certificates of ownership which are also
called non-fungible tokens or nfts
until a major change about two weeks ago
called the merge ethereum was similar to
Bitcoin in that it relied on a technique
called proof of work that uses a really
large amount of power so proof of work
is not energy hungry because it's
complicated or because it's useful proof
of work is just a process for generating
random numbers and it's only energy
hungry because the price of the currency
is tied to the cost of wasted
electricity so the network ethereum was
powered by people called miners that
basically waste energy in exchange for
cryptocurrency and when the price of
ethereum went up then miners would waste
more energy and when it went down they
would turn off some portion of the 10
million computers that were powering the
network most computational processes can
be made more efficient with faster
Hardware or better algorithms but not
ethereum
as sorry not proof of work specifically
as as an artist I was trying to figure
out like whether to work with nfts so I
looked for Reliable numbers on the
energy use but I couldn't really find
any
um they were either out of date or a
really contentious uh so I did my own
research and spoke with experts and I
wrote an article about what I learned
some people told me this is going to be
too difficult you can't do that there's
too many variables but I wanted to show
that you know even though these systems
seem really complicated with some care
we can kind of disentangle and
understand them
I found that just before it transitioned
away from proof of work ethereum was
using around 22 terawatt hours a year
but no one really knows what a terawatt
hour is so uh that for reference the
entire internet uses around 100 terawatt
hours a year that entire internet so
ethereum usage was using uh more than
one-fifth of the power compared to the
entire internet this is also if you want
to compare to other things like you
could say this is more than a small
country like Iceland which uses about 18
terawatt hours per year or you can
compare to kind of centralized Tech like
Google and Facebook so 22 terawatt hours
is about the same as Google and Facebook
combined you know every the difference
though is that every second Google is
answering around 50 000 searches and
playing over 50 000 YouTube videos and
ethereum in one second processes about
15 transactions things
and this isn't renewable energy so the
emissions are from this network are a
bit like running multiple coal power
plants
um it's also I just learned the other
day this is twice all of the emissions
from all flights between New York and
London
um if you want to divide it up like in
terms of people you could say this is
about what uh 1.4 million people would
admit around the world or if you look at
like a really high energy hungry country
like Saudi Arabia or the United States
that's about 400 000 people in one year
we're doing the same amount of emissions
as ethereum the scale of electricity
used by proof of work has been forcing
countries from Kazakhstan to Canada to
put restrictions on crypto last year
government officials in Sweden just
called for an end to proof of work
across all of Europe because they said
it represents a threat to the climate
transition
fortunately like I said just two weeks
ago on September 15th ethereum moved
away from proof of work successfully but
even after this transition I want to ask
when Tech sort of like moves fast and
breaks things who picks up the pieces
when an industry moves on why are the
rest of us left with this big mess you
know with CO2 in the atmosphere with a
warming planet with Rising Seas
mountains of old gpus this isn't really
sustainable and I think we need to
reimagine how Tech is built and how we
hold it accountable
and who do we hold accountable some
people really want to focus on
individual action and of course it's
really important to ask you know what
can I do in my life
um how can I contribute to this
personally but historically it's also
important to remember that individual
action has been used as a deflection
from corporate responsibility so this
idea of like a personal carbon footprint
you know what on Earth is a carbon
footprint this was actually an ad
campaign by the advertising firm Ogilvy
for the oil company BP in 2005. the
entire concept of the personal carbon
footprint was invented for the oil
industry as a way to deflect
responsibility away from them and onto
individuals so in the case of ethereum
instead of blaming artists for you know
having minted on this very high energy
blockchain I I think it's good to look
at the organizations that have been
making the most profit which includes
the nft marketplaces like Open Sea
wearable or Foundation which each take a
five percent cut of every sale and
they've been hesitant to engage with
lower energy alternatives to ethereum
until now when it's finally sort of like
washed clean
um
so in my latest work which is called
amends I created a series of sculptures
designed to mitigate emissions from
these nft marketplaces there's one
sculpture per Marketplace Minted as an
nft and the price is set at the cost of
mitigating the emissions for that
Marketplace
the total cost to mitigate emissions
from all three marketplaces is around 24
million dollars
for over 1 million tons of CO2
amends went on sale when ethereum
transitioned away from proof of work and
I'm happy to be partnered with a gray
area who's sponsoring the work by
facilitating the sale and providing a
lot of other guidance and if the work
sells all of the profit from those sales
will be split between three carbon
mitigation companies I've partnered with
each of them has different approaches to
greenhouse gas removal and reduction
now if you know anything about carbon F
sets you know historically they've been
abused by the biggest polluters to avoid
making reductions and many carbon
offsets don't do what they claim to do
you know they might be sold by some guy
who says he was going to chop down a
forest even though he was never really
planning on chopping it down they might
be sold by a corrupt government official
who Pockets most of the cash and then
uses the leftovers to plant invasive
monoculture trees that just destroy the
local ecosystem and then maybe even if
that works those trees and that whole
Forest might just burn down a few years
later but there is also essential work
happening that can only really be funded
by carbon offsets right now and I want
to share the work of the three Partners
behind amends so first is Nori they're
working with farmers who practice
regenerative agriculture which is
basically by making key changes to the
way that these farmers are farming they
can sink carbon dioxide into this soil
and this is a benefit for the climate
but it also is a benefit for the soil
and for our health using cover crops and
no-till farming techniques keeps these
kind of soil microbes healthy and happy
throughout the year which increases the
nutrients available to the plants and
these techniques also
they create a kind of resilience
partially by decreasing Reliance on
inorganic chemical inputs which are
normally used for
feeding the crops and there's some kind
of new science here that's still being
understood better but overall this
approach is pretty ancient and known by
many indigenous peoples already
um
number two project Vesta they're
researching this experimental process
called enhanced Coastal weathering so on
some beaches around the world there's
this green sand called Olivine and when
ocean waves crash on these beaches the
olivines chemically converted to
something called bicarbonate which is
used by Marine creatures to build their
shells and exoskeletons and skeletons
and this process of converting from
Olivine to bicarbonate actually captures
carbon dioxide from the ocean and in
turn reduces the acidity of the water
and it turns out while there are only a
few beaches that have this green sand
Olivine is actually the most abundant
mineral in the earth's upper mantle
there's a lot of it so project Vesta is
researching whether this naturally
occurring process can be scaled up to
capture a significant portion of
historical CO2 emissions while also
de-acidifying the oceans
trade water number three they're dealing
with a really different kind of
historical debt but has some parallels
to sort of technological debt like with
ethereum so old air conditioning systems
like in old cars they relied on these
refrigerants like Freon and when these
gases Escape into the atmosphere they
cause about 10 000 times more warming
than CO2
and even though the worst of these gases
were banned decades ago the canisters
that hold these gases are still sitting
in warehouses and garages around the
world just kind of slowly rusting and
weathering and then eventually rusting
through and leaking into the atmosphere
and tradewater basically goes out and
finds and destroys these canisters
before they have the chance to leak
so each of these companies is doing
really essential work they're healing
the soil they're laying groundwork for
future carbon removal with these
research efforts and they're also
managing these dangerous gases like
refrigerants and ideally we'd be able to
fund their work even when we aren't
trying to like offset emissions
elsewhere and this does happen sometimes
so for example tradewater told me about
a tech company that purchased about 30
times the offsets on all of their
emissions and we could use a lot more of
that if amends doesn't sell and after
two weeks so far it has none of it none
of them have
it will kind of remain a monument I
think to inaction of the crypto
ecosystem but even if it does sell I'm
still cautious of nfts for a few reasons
I wanted to mention independent from the
ecological concern so the rate at which
most art nfts are flipped indicates
they're being purchased mainly as
financial instruments similar to how the
Contemporary Art Market works
um and you know there's a place for the
Contemporary Art Market but uh this
really encourages collectors to engage
with art as a kind of Casino Style game
it reduces the art to its monetary value
and artists to money printers there's
also things that are genuinely important
for the Digital Arts that some people
think nft solves but they don't really
so for example nfts are promoted as a
solution for archiving media but when
you sell your artwork on an nft
Marketplace the only thing that's
archived is the transaction history it's
like the receipt is archived the media
itself is stored on a separate server
that may or may not one day disappear
nfts are promoted as a solution for
enforcing resale royalties but in fact
they do not enforce resale royalties
nfts are promoted as a solution for
verifying authenticity but in fact fakes
are everywhere the entire ecosystem is
designed on principles of deregulation
so there's nothing really stopping
scammers from downloading anyone's
digital art and selling it and there's a
lot of artists who have wasted their
time fighting marketplaces to remove
artwork that's being sold without their
consent and because the entire concept
of the blockchain is that all the
changes and additions should be
irreversible there are no undos so even
when a Marketplace delists a stolen or
fake artwork that nft persists and it
can still be sold on other platforms
for me one of the biggest concerns is
that the entire crypto ecosystem
decenters people
so on Web 2.0 at least we were like
users uh but with crypto we're just
wallets and this means that if we want
to build systems that redistribute
wealth to people or systems that allow
people to vote we don't really have a
concept of people to work with we can
only redistribute wealth to wallets and
let wallets vote with money this is a
complex like theoretical and practical
problem that crypto has just not solved
yet
um we've also been told this moment
represents like a major change that
we're going to see a decentralization of
finance that radically favors
individuals over corporate interests and
that this should help solve some of the
biggest challenges we face today uh and
yet these uh two biggest blockchain
ecosystems Bitcoin and ethereum spent
years relying on this massively
polluting technology of proof of work
with ethereum only changing recently
after six years and Bitcoin with no
plans to change its code by the way
Bitcoin is about four times worse in all
of these metrics in terms of energy use
and Emissions compared to ethereum
so
these blockchains have also seen buy-in
from the same Venture capitalists who
brought us the web infrastructure that
we use today
none of this is really simple and we
need to talk through it which is why
I've been running a series of group
therapy sessions to discuss our feelings
about and experiences with crypto and
nfts and I think we need space to share
our confusion our excitement frustration
Financial anxiety even changing
friendships you know when you suddenly
find out one of your friends is much
much wealthier than you or you have or
they have different values than you do I
think this is going to be a moment of
change and this is the change I want to
see I want to see a reorientation
towards healing the environment and
ourselves and a Reliance on each other
through mutual Aid instead of Reliance
on markets and Wealthy donors and I want
to see Tech that's built by the people
who are most impacted by that Tech in a
way that's truly accountable instead of
being built by developers and Tech
Visionaries that walk away from all the
mess and the broken pieces of their
utopian dreams thank you you
know
I think we have a couple minutes for
questions
yeah hi guys
um thanks so much Kyle that was awesome
um I have a question for you
um you know so we're thinking about the
future and we're thinking about of
course the title of the conference
distant early warnings and so from
engaging in this really involved
research you know project and also kind
of being embedded in the social
ecosystem that surrounds
cryptocurrencies in particularly these
marketplaces you know how do you see
these how do you understand web3 to
integrate into our lives in the coming
years you kind of have lived through and
put out this work during a major
technological change for ethereum and
what also at least culturally feels like
a social change related to this
blockchain so I would love to hear kind
of some of your your predictions if you
could look into the crystal ball
that's wow I'm not a very good futurist
but I'll do my best
um I you know I haven't seen anything
yet in the web3 ecosystem that really
signals Mass adoption or mass utility
um I think if something like that
happens then we might see some big
change but I think it's important to
remember right now uh all the hype
around web3 and crypto is really a very
small very vocal minority it's not
really like a web 2 or a web one where
it just kind of started small and
started getting bigger I mean ethereum's
been around for six years and uh you
know six years after let's say Myspace
was the first version of web 2 we
already had you know YouTube was the
biggest website on the internet at that
point six years later so we're not
really seeing the same kind of
um
like
we're not seeing the same path kind of
being tread by web3 if we see it as
something being similar to web2 so it's
really hard to predict that it's ever
going to get much bigger than it is now
I think if there's something like I said
that sort of signals Mass adoption uh
like a wallet that works really well or
like a a lot of websites integrating
login through web3 or something like
that then we might see some other change
yeah absolutely and again it's still
really early and I like that you know
something that I think is really that
you all mention whenever talking about
this
um you know especially when you were
talking about the kind of you know
branding surrounding carbon Footprints
um was is this really important ship
from Individual responsibility to either
Collective or corporate responsibility
and I was wondering if you could like
you know uh you know dial into that a
little bit more and you know why was
switching that thinking so important for
you as you were developing this this
project
yeah I
um
you know we're all in the Arts here
together we're like trying to get to the
other side of this somehow whatever
happens like whether it turns out that
all Arts funding is somehow replaced
with market-based web3 economy or
whether it turns out that crypto is
completely regulated away in some
countries like it has been in China and
kind of partially regulated in many
other countries
um maybe it won't be here in the U.S
anymore in a few years uh whatever
happens like we need to get through this
together and I I guess I felt early on
in this climate discussion about crypto
that we were sort of tearing apart at
the seams um and when artists are
fighting against other artists and
against Art institutions we all lose and
we need to figure out like not
necessarily about like who's
individually doing something wrong we
need to figure out like who has power
and interrogate power instead and I
think uh reading more about the climate
movement and understanding historically
like how like the problems that they've
dealt with helped me realize like oh
this is just a smaller version of that
and we can learn from those lessons
which is basically one of the biggest
lessons from the climate movement is to
like not fight for Purity like don't
blame people for not being pure because
then the movement just falls apart
thank you so much Kyle really appreciate
you being here today
[Applause]